This is the continuation of the code challenge from the previous video.
So here we are beginning with exercise four.
This is really the key exercise of this code challenge.
And there's another exercise after this one.
But that's just a minor modification.
Anyway, the goal of this exercise is to take the analyses that you wrote for exercise three and put
them into a for loop over all of the transformer layers.
Now, the top row on this figure shows mutual information, and the bottom row shows correlations between
mutual information and inter token distances.
So up here on the left we have mutual information for attention.
Over here is for mutual information for MLP.
And in all of these plots.
The x axis shows the transformer block.
So the depth into the model and each data point in each of these scatter plots is the average mutual
information over all of the pairs of tokens.
So from that matrix that you created from exercise three, this data point here would be the average
of all of the non-zero mutual information values, all the all those non-zero values averaged together.
Now these are averages of lots of data points.
But we can ask the question whether mutual information is different between the attention and the MLP
subblocks.
To answer that question, you can run a t test within each transformer block on all of the attention
mutual information values.
So all of the values that go into this average here versus all of the MLP.
Mutual information values from the same layer from the same transformer block.
And if you do a t test on those two sets of values, that will give you a t value, a t statistic and
a p value.
And you can plot those in a scatter plot over here on the right.
And what I have also done is mark the significant t tests with a green hexagon and the non-significant
t values with a red x.
And basically what this plot will allow you to do is interpret any differences in mutual information,
values that you observe between the attention and the MLP subblocks.
So that's for the top row.
And then the bottom row shows the correlations between mutual information and inter token distances
calculated separately for each layer.
So the y axis shows the Kendall's tau correlation coefficient and the x axis shows the transformer block.
This is from attention.
This is from MLP.
Now here in this graph over here this shows the statistical differences or the statistical comparison
between the two correlations.
So the correlation with in attention and the correlation within MLP.
Now comparing to correlation coefficients against each other requires a special statistical procedure.
It's just one correlation value per layer.
So there's no t test that you can perform.
So before sending you off to Python to code up this exercise, let me briefly explain the formula for
statistically comparing two correlation coefficients.
Imagine that you have two sets of data x and y, or you know, for blue group and the green group.
Now clearly the x and y variables are correlated positively for the blue dots and negatively for the
green dots.
The question we can ask here is not whether the blue dots are different from the green dots, in terms
of either x or y, but instead we are going to ask whether this correlation coefficient is significantly
different from this correlation coefficient.
Now it is visually obvious that the sign of the correlation is different.
One is positive, the other is negative.
But are the two correlation coefficients statistically significantly different from each other?
That is what we need a special test for.
and we can get that from a z test on the correlation coefficients, which looks like this.
So the numerator is the difference between the two correlation coefficients transformed using a functional.
Explain in a moment and the denominator is a function of the degrees of freedom.
Now this formula here is actually a simplification, assuming that both data sets have exactly the same
sample size or n, so this corresponds to the sample size of each data set, not the sum of all of the
data set.
Sample sizes from the two data sets.
So for this code challenge, that will always be the case.
The two sample sizes are always going to be the same because the correlation is of embeddings dimensions.
And of course those are always the same number.
Now once you have calculated this z score you can obtain a p value using the cumulative distribution
function of that z value.
So this z value is normally distributed under the null hypothesis.
And so this is the CDF of the normal distribution okay.
Getting back to the numerator here you can see that the numerator of the z score is not the raw correlation
coefficients themselves, but instead is some function some transformation.
And that is called the Fisher z transform.
And it's really just a clever trick that transforms data from a uniform distribution into a normal distribution.
And it turns out that this formula here is also equivalent to the inverse hyperbolic tangent function.
And there's a function in NumPy that applies this transformation.
Okay.
So the scatter plot here in this panel shows the z values from that z test that I just showed you,
and I've marked them as red x's for non-significant differences in correlations between MLP and attention,
and a green hexagon if they are significant.
The final thing I want to mention here is that because we are performing 48 statistical tests here and
here, you will need to appropriately correct for multiple comparisons because yeah, we're doing so
many tests.
So you can apply a Bonferroni correction where you use a p value threshold of 0.05 divided by the number
of tests, which is 48 in this case.
That is a method we've used before.
You can also use the FDR correction using the function that I briefly mentioned and showed you in the
beginning of exercise one.
When I switch to code, it's in the top of the notebook file where I import all of the libraries.
And this function FDR correction.
So quite a bit to do in this exercise.
But I know you can do it.
Pause the video and get to work.
And now I will switch to Python, show my solution and continue the discussion.
All of the main results for this exercise are going to be stored in this matrix.
Here my results.
It is two by layers by two.
The layers of course corresponds to the transformer blocks.
This first two here is for the attention versus the MLP neuron findings.
And this one corresponds to the average mutual information versus the correlation between mutual information
and the inter token distances.
These are just intermediate matrices that I don't really care about.
I'm just using them within each layer.
Okay.
And so let's see here I'm looping over all of the layers.
And now this code here should all look familiar.
This is exactly the code for exercise three.
So looping over all of the target tokens extracting the activations so the outputs from the attention
subblock for this target and for the other target for all of the embeddings dimensions.
This zero here is because we only have one text sequence in the batch, so it's always going to be indexed
as zero okay.
Now of course this is a little bit different from exercise three because there I just hard coded it
to be layer three.
And of course here we want to access this in a loop.
Okay.
So here I get the mutual information.
Again don't worry about this line of code.
That's for exercise five.
Uh this is a repeat of this code up here, but for the MLP sub block instead of the attention sub block.
And then again it's mutual information.
You can see I'm storing those in separate matrices here.
M I a for attention and M for MLP.
Okay.
So now all of this code runs inside this double for loop.
Once we are finished with this double for loop, then we're still inside this layer for loop.
And we continue all the way down here.
So here I'm extracting the summary statistics for the attention layer.
So here I'm just taking the non-zero values from this matrix.
So all of the upper triangular values.
And I put that into this vector here I call it u for unique m I for mutual information and a for attention.
Okay.
And then here I have the token distances.
Also just Extracting a vector corresponding to the nonzero elements here that we actually care about.
And this I'm calling Udai.
And by the way, this matrix here token distances that doesn't change across the different layers.
That is a property of the text.
It's not a property of the model.
So therefore we already calculated this from exercise three.
We do not need to calculate it again here.
Okay.
So then uh yeah I store the average of all of these values.
And then the Kendall's tau correlation between these two values.
Uh, the Kendall tau function outputs an object.
It contains a bunch of information, including the z score statistic, the p value, and the degrees
of freedom.
In this case, I only want the statistic here.
Okay.
So that was for attention.
This is exactly the same code, but it's for the MLP instead of the attention block.
And here I am applying a t test to compare the mutual information in attention and MLP.
And here I get the t statistic and the p value.
Okay.
And then here is the implementation of the z score.
To compare the correlation coefficients that I have extracted here and here.
So uh the Fisher z transform the inverse hyperbolic tangent.
And then uh this is the formula.
So the difference of the correlations divided by uh something square root of two over n minus three
is related to the degrees of freedom.
By the way uh, if you notice.
So I said that the, uh, sample sizes are always the same.
They're technically not necessarily the same between attention and MLP.
If you have, uh, extreme values that are removed.
But the thing is that the number of samples that get removed is tiny.
It's less than 1% compared to the total number of embeddings vectors that we have, which is our dimensionality
of the embeddings vectors, which is 1600.
So this approximation is actually completely fine.
It really doesn't do anything.
Okay.
So then I calculate the z and p values.
And now I'm storing them over here.
Now this loop is actually pretty fast.
You can see it was like a second somewhere less than two seconds to run all of this for all the layers.
And why did this run so fast?
Partly that's because this implementation is pretty fast.
Partly because I'm not running this implementation, which is a little bit longer.
I've pre-computed pre-calculated, uh, this, uh, variable here, although this is also very fast
to run this token distances.
But mostly the answer why this cell takes so little time to calculate is that there's only seven tokens.
So it goes through this double for loop quite quickly, and you can compare that with how long it took
to run this analysis.
A couple of videos ago, when we were calculating mutual information across all of the tokens separately
for each pair of embeddings dimensions.
Okay, so that was all many mouthfuls to explain all of this code, but I hope it all makes sense.
Now I'm going to create that plot that was completely blocked out in the in the slides.
And let's see, I think I'm not really going to talk about this visualization.
It's mostly quite straightforward.
I'm really just accessing the different elements of this matrix here.
Most of the code is just there to make the plots look a little bit nicer.
Okay, so here you see the results.
And what do we see here.
So we see that the mutual information is high in the beginning and high at the end in the attention.
And it's lower in the middle.
And then for MLP the mutual information is high early on when we are close to the original text.
And then it basically goes down and it stays pretty flat.
The correlations in general are almost always negative.
So here is a correlation of zero which would mean no relationship.
And what do we make of this.
The interpretation of these results is that in general it is always the case that the further apart
two tokens are from each other, the less mutual information there is between them.
Again, we can also describe that the other way around.
So we can say that the closer two tokens are to each other in a text, the more likely that their mutual
information between those two tokens is going to be high.
Again, that is not very surprising.
That's a sensible, predictable result.
It basically means that two tokens are closer together and they share a lot of context, which is what
these models are extracting from the text to process the token and translate each token into a prediction
for what the next token should be.
Okay.
And then let me finally discuss these statistical results here.
So again the red x's mean that they the results are not statistically significantly different.
Which means that the amount of mutual information, the average mutual information somewhere around
here is the same in MLP and attention.
But where these really differ is that the MLP has a lot higher mutual information here in the beginning
so early in the transformer, whereas later in the transformer, later in the model, the attention
starts generating more and more.
So stronger mutual information, more statistical interdependencies.
And the MLP basically just stays low.
And why is that the case?
Well, as we go further into the model, the attention Subblock has to incorporate more and more context
into the representation of each of these tokens.
So more context means more shared information across the different tokens.
And that's why you see the attention mutual information increasing, whereas the MLP layers stay basically
the same once it kind of settles into this regime over here.
So after that really intense exercise I wanted to have one more exercise with not too much work to do.
So the goal of exercise five is just to compare the manual implementation of mutual information with
the scikit learn implementation.
And we don't need to do any quantitative comparisons here, just qualitative.
So all you need to do is repeat exercises three and four.
But using the mutual information calculation from scikit learn and not from the manual implementation.
And you also do not need to apply the outlier thresholding in this case.
And here's a little tip.
Before you rerun the code, take a screenshot of the results from the previous exercise and paste that
result into a text cell in the notebook that will store the figure in the notebook instead of rewriting
it when you rerun the code.
so that makes it easy to compare the two mutual information calculations.
This is the final exercise in this code challenge, and I think it's an easy one, but an interesting
one and a good way to wrap up this code challenge.
And now I will switch to code.
Okay.
So I'm actually going to start by taking a screenshot of this result here.
So copy that.
And now I'm going to make a new text box.
Literally just paste that in.
And now we get that figure here.
So now the figure appears twice.
This is the figure that is the output from this code cell.
And I can actually just get rid of that.
And now this is the figure that is embedded inside this text cell.
So this is not going to be overwritten.
So now what I can do is actually I will leave I can rerun that.
I was going to say I'm not going to do this for exercise three, but I will do it anyway.
Let's see.
So here.
Uh, yeah.
So all I have to do is uncomment this line, comment out that line, rerun this code.
It still is quite fast to run.
And now we see qualitatively we don't really recognize much differences.
This correlation if you'll remember it was -0.52 I think.
And now it's 0.49.
So overall you know qualitatively exactly the same okay.
So now we do this for all the layers.
So I can comment that uncomment that comment that uncomment that rerun.
And uh that takes a little bit longer now because this function is slower.
This takes some extra time, but it still shouldn't be more than some seconds.
Okay.
So that finished.
And now I can rerun the visualization code.
And now we can compare these two figures.
So this is the new one with the scikit learn.
And this is the old one with the manual implementation.
If you look very carefully you will find some subtle differences.
But the differences are subtle.
They're not really that striking.
So this tells us that the manual implementation and the scikit learn implementation are often really,
really similar to each other.
There's one last thing that I wanted to mention.
This is not about llms or data analysis.
It's just like a visualization hack that I wanted to mention in exercise four, but I forgot.
Okay.
So the issue is how do we get these points to be plotted or correctly labeled, given that we do not
know a priori which points will be significant and non-significant?
So what I did here, it's a bit of a hacky solution, but I plotted two extra dots in this plot, and
I labeled them as being significant and non-significant.
And these plots are way, way, way outside.
Or these data points are way outside the plot range.
So they're at value 100 zero.
And this goes up to 48.
So those two dots are plotted all the way out here and they're ignored there.
You don't see them in this plot.
But the advantage is that those are labeled.
And that turns out to be a better approach than trying to label this where you will end up with lots
of individual labels.
You're going to have like 48 different labels here, which you don't want.
There are a few general points that I would like to stress here.
One is that you have now seen several times that once you understand the basic analysis approach, it
is straightforward to adapt and apply it to multiple situations and data sets, in this case calculating
mutual information within each token pair.
Over embeddings.
Dimensions versus within each embeddings.
Dimension over token pairs.
Now there's no single correct way to run these analyses.
They can be used to test different hypotheses or investigate different organization schemes in the models.
What I hope you are getting from this course is an ever increasing toolbox, and knowledge of how to
use the various tools to contribute to the field or in general, explainable AI, technical AI, safety
or whatever you want to do.
And that will continue in the next code challenge, where you will compare the results from mutual information
and covariance and discover some really interesting patterns of clustering for different appearances
of the same tokens.